[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
somebody whose logic has had a profound
impact on how i think about bitcoin in
particular and investing in general the
one and only michael saylor michael
welcome to the show
thanks for having me dude so you are the
founder and ceo of microstrategy you
went to mit
uh at one point you almost became a
fighter pilot and a misdiagnosis
has granted us all a very interesting
public ceo to watch
and i want to actually start with that
story there's something about the way
that you face
massive disruption
that i find really interesting so i want
to start with the beginning of
microstrategy there was sort of you
versus another guy
going head-to-head with your ideas i
think started companies at relatively
the same time and he kept telling you
that you were doing things wrong
and you would make an adjustment and it
would have a material impact on your
business and you just kept
going with that facing what you referred
to as these existential threats
and the way that you handle existential
threats i find incredibly informative so
if you don't mind starting there that
would be really interesting
sure
um
you know so i started a company when i
was 24
and we didn't have a lot of resources i
i guess
i took out like a 5 000 furniture loan
and then i employed my
my first employer dupont
to give me a 250 000 contract
and then i asked for like a hundred
thousand in cash up front and
and uh my negotiating technique was they
said we don't normally do it and i said
well i don't have any money and so i
can't build the software you want unless
you give me the money up front
and uh that that negotiating strategy
only works once in your life but for me
it worked and so they wanted what i had
to
offer and so they gave me the money so
we started with not that much capital
and when you don't have that much
capital you know you can't you can't do
anything so
we were using we're building computer
simulations based upon uh an existing
piece of software that i had and it was
limited but we did what we could and we
grew the company to like 750 000 a year
and then we grew it to 950 000 the next
year
and we
and we saw an opportunity
to plug into
a graphical interface
and
the idea was give computer simulations
to executives to predict the future
and the problem was
it was kind of delving they couldn't
figure out what the assumptions were so
we thought well maybe we can actually
create a piece of software
that lets them plug in the assumptions
and of course we couldn't afford to
write it in c plus so we didn't even
have the programming skills to build the
software it was like 1991
or so so we found a product called wings
which was like an excel
spreadsheet but it had its own scripting
language and graphical interface it was
one of the first graphical interface
development tools
and we took that product
and we plugged it into our simulation
engine
and um
and
you know that that
friend i told you about friend slash
competitor was a former professor from
mit
and uh so he had the phd and he had all
the knowledge and uh and i was just the
kid you know trying to grow a company
so in his wisdom what he said was
you know like everybody knows that
you've got to use excel if you use a
spreadsheet you can't use wings excel is
the winner
and my response was yeah it might be the
market share leader but it doesn't have
the functionality the technology just
doesn't work for me
so i can either use excel and fail
like take to take the safe choice and
fail or i can try something new and
succeed
and he goes well you know long term
that's not going to work i said well you
know we all know that eventually excel
will crush them like all my business
school case studies say that
so i i said yeah but short term
we're going to fail so we got to do
something so we built the product with
wings and it was a screaming success and
the company doubled and we became a two
million dollar company and we became a
four million dollar company
and then we became a
six an eight million dollar company
and uh then a 16 million dollar company
and right around the time we were 16
million dollar company he was still a
one million dollar consultancy because
he hadn't taken the risk
and he was not at risk he had no
existential threats
whereas we had a 16 million dollar
company with threats which was
was uh excel was going to squeeze wings
out of the business and so
the answer was
we rebuilt our product on microsoft base
so we started using visual basic and
microsoft technology
and at that point when we were 16 times
bigger than that consultancy he said you
know every every good software
engineering company that i know uses c
plus plus they don't use visual basic
you know and uh and so you're not gonna
get taken seriously
and i said well you know i have people
that can figure out how to do it in
visual basic and they can't figure out
how to do it in c plus plus
so we did it the other way and then we
doubled to 32 million and we doubled the
64 million
and he stayed 1 million
and we we at 64 million we had this
existential risk which is we needed to
code part of our software and c plus
plus
but we of course were 64 times bigger
than we had been and we're 4x bigger
than we were when we started so we hired
a lot of people and we started coding in
c plus plus
and
he still had a a secure consulting
company that was a million dollars with
no risk
and uh you know and
it went on like that the next thing was
we adopted uh you know the internet and
we started building our software to run
on html
and people said well you know like no
big company uses html it's a risky thing
and it might not be secure it doesn't do
that and we thought well you know well
we can't give the software to 20 000
people unless we try this and so maybe
we'll try to figure out the problem
so
the result was initially we built it and
not that many people used it and then we
built it and people use more of it and
then we built the third version and
everybody used it and then the people
that hadn't built the internet version
got squeezed out of business
and then you know then it went on and
by at this point right the company is
like 200 times bigger than the million
dollar consultancy which is still not at
risk
but it's the difference between being a
technology company
and being a services company
services companies don't take risks and
they don't
they don't pursue architectures
technology companies need to take risk
and and of course
that
eventually uh the mobile wave hit and we
rebuilt our software to run on ios and
then people said well you're crazy
android's the winner so we built our
software on android and eventually we
had software running on pc operating
systems web operating systems android
and ios operating systems and then of
course eventually the web browsers
changed to chrome and and in plug-ins we
built something supported plug-ins
if you sign up for technology i think
you gotta have this model in your head
that you're a snake that's shutting its
skin
every three four years
or i mean a really good model in nature
for growth under pressure is a chambered
nautilus
and a chambered nautilus is this
creature that grows under under deep sea
pressure and it and it builds a shell
and of course the shape of the chambered
nautilus is this spiral because the
creature
is rebuilding the next shell to be twice
as big
as the last shell and turning in on
itself and is using its previous work as
the structure to support the next piece
of work
and so
if you look at the at the design of a
chambered nautilus what you see is
is nature's solution for growth under
pressure
and um
and i think that's how technology
companies work you're just always
growing you can't abandon what you've
done
but
neither can you uh
can you uh
not move forward and not take risk and
not not branch off in a new area so you
so there's this very interesting dynamic
dance between
between uh respect for the past
and integrity uh and architecture versus
uh the opportunity
and the challenge of the future
and you're living in that zone in the
middle the the friction between those
two this is uh the very thing that makes
you so compelling to me and the way that
you think through problems and and
compelling in a way where i have taken
your advice and invested a substantial
portion of my entire net worth um into
bitcoin not by force of personality but
by the way that you can walk people
through the logic of how to
think through a problem
and the one sort of uh capstone that
i'll put on the story that you just told
to really build your credibility and
then we're gonna go cause my audience
probably doesn't know a lot about crypto
in general they may not know a lot about
you yet
and
the capstone i want to put on is you are
if not the longest serving ceo of a
publicly traded company in your industry
one of certainly the top
and you know in an era where
ceos and public companies
you know are constantly like in fear of
losing their job you've navigated
through insane storms including the
dot-com crash including the
2008 crisis uh including kovid so it's
um i think you said at one point you
actually
went through a 98
loss in shareholder value and still
managed to keep your job so just
understanding how profoundly difficult
that is now i will credit it to
something and then you can tell me if
i'm crazy
what i credit it to
is not only your ability to sort of
analogize something like the the
chambered nautilus but that you think
from first principles
and that's what i found so compelling in
your analysis of bitcoin is just
reducing it down to first principle so
want to be great
um for you to define what first
principles are so that people understand
that and then for the rest of the
interview we sort of build on how that
plays out in crypto
yeah i think probably the most valuable
thing that i i learned from mit
was
to think from first principles and to be
intellectually fearless
mit is just a is an entire university
full of very bright people but
intellectually fearless people
my
my freshman classmates you know one of
them started a computer company
and launched a pacman competitor and got
a cease and desist letter from
our computer the game company another
one designed hardware that went on the
space shuttle you know
another one uh used to like
rip down and fix his own cars for fun on
the weekends and they were
they were just capable people that
weren't afraid to do something and what
does that mean to be intellectually
fearless like you're not afraid of
looking stupid you're not afraid of
breaking something what is that
my in my first material science class
the professor comes out and we're
literally all freshmen it's the first
the first hour of our um of our time in
in the class and maybe it's like a
freshman year
class like freshman year first semester
so it's early
so the professor walks on the first
lecture and he holds up a tile he says
you know i'm a consultant to nasa and
this tile burned off the space shuttle
on re-entry last week
so they have a problem they don't know
why they flew me down to talk about it
so they gave me the tile we had a deep
discussion they're still not sure he
says so here's the tile what do you guys
think
and uh you know everybody looks at each
other and these are like 18 year olds
right we're
okay i was valedictorian of my class or
i'm an eagle scout or whatever but
they're all thinking was this in the
readings
you know i did i not read this and and
there's this first you know
horrifying thought right that i should
know the answer but i don't
and then uh the light bulb goes off and
and you know one one guy in the front
row raises his hand and he and he
suggests that maybe you ought to try to
you know reverse the lattice composite
or you know or ask a question about the
nature of the material and where it was
on the space shuttle
and then he pause it's a theory
and then the rest of us go
wow that professor actually expects us
to think for ourself
and then and then we realized
he just asked us the question that he
doesn't know the answer to that nasa
doesn't know the answer to that no one
in the world knows the answer to
it's not in the back of the book and
then the second thought is not only is
it a truly a truly
unique question
he actually has confidence that maybe we
can reason our way through it to figure
out a methodology to solve the problem
so
i would say that a lot of education
consists of rote learning you read
something you read the answers on the
back of the book you try to remember
what the answers are and then you
regurgitate them back
but there's a point in your life when
you have to reason from first principle
so what are first principles
a grasp of math a grasp of the
scientific method you know um
a grasp of of you know elements like at
some point you have to build a building
you have to choose an element where you
choose steel or will you choose bronze
or will you choose gold or will you
choose silver or
or ceramic or
whatever if you don't understand the
math of civil engineering and if you
don't know anything about material
science then you certainly can't put one
thing together with a structure and make
it
stand or not stand
so
engineering in general is
is about learning enough math enough
science and enough uh engineering
technique in order to construct the
mechanism that's going to work
right under whatever the circumstances
is you need it to work i think
that's that's what it means to reason
from first principles you have to be
want to take a clean sheet of paper
like a literally a clean sheet of paper
like a for example i tell you design
something that flies you get wood
okay
design something that flies you get a
metal pick the metal well
we don't design planes with steel why
it's the perfect metal for everything
except flying it's just too heavy to fly
you will never ever successfully design
a plane with steel without aluminum you
will never design a metal plane it's
just not happening so
so if i tell you design a plane that
flies in high winds that's a different
design
designer you know design something that
works in cold
right if
if you're unable to to divine the impact
of the change in the material design
something that flies on the moon
but it's it's different flying on the
moon and flying on the earth right what
if i change the gravitational constant
what if i change this the speed
you know with of sound right what have i
changed the density of the air
how about run a marathon how about run a
marathon at the top of mount everest
how about how about stay alive for a day
at the top of mount everest if i were
going to string those together to give
people an overarching sentiment of what
unites those and tell me if you think
this is crazy
what i explain to people is you have to
understand the physics of the situation
like the the whole thing about flight
you have to understand lift to
understand this is about using and trust
me when i say i don't know the actual
physics of flying but the sort of
ballpark idea is you've got thrust
you've got the wind hitting underneath
the wings so weight is going to become
an issue the amount of thrust that you
have is going to become an issue and
when your thrust exceeds the you know
effort that you need to get that lift
then you fly and if you fail to do that
then you crash and when you understand
this is about recognizing the the way
that it works so tensile strength of the
you know object you choose to build your
building is going to determine the
amount of weight that it can hold things
like that and once you understand that
foundational layer
now you don't have to necessarily follow
a book you can just think well i know
that this will work because this is a
function of you know strength
weight
durability and once you get the
parameters that you're operating under
now you can build something that's new
because you just you understand
literally the physics of that situation
i think engineering is a discipline of
constructing mechanisms to channel
energy
and
so
you have to understand a bit of math
you got to understand uh the basics of
physics
you fly and you and you generate lift
but you gotta you gotta know enough to
know that the amount of lift you
generate is different if the density the
air is different and if there is no air
try generating
right like uh
human beings
human beings rise through channeling
energy so so fire was pretty elemental
okay how about uh does that burn or does
that not burn right i give you two
things can you burn a rock can you burn
some wood all wood doesn't burn the same
can you burn grass
yeah design an oven
how about uh you know we wouldn't have
made it without uh air bows and arrows
missiles right probably the most
elemental thing is you need to hunt from
a distance okay so design a bow
design an arrowhead
i give you four rocks choose the one
that makes the best arrowhead
okay kind of common sense right not not
the light happy shiny soft rock
maybe the sharp flint
rock that will will do the job now
design an arrow you want a long arrow
short arrow but
you have some ideas
but then there's also experiments right
how long should the arrow be
okay we'll make it this long fire the
arrow now make it this long fire the
arrow again now make it this long fire
there now should i create a bunch of
randomly different sized arrows
uh
pro probably one of the arrows works
better than the others right so after i
fire 100 arrows and i pick the 87th
arrow then i'm going to manufacture 10
000 arrows of the the 87th arrows length
and and width and
make up and
you know and then put the right
arrowhead on it and manufacture it and
pretty soon you don't have to go and
wrestle with a gorilla or a bear in
order to get dinner
so
it goes on right i mean
what's a sale channeling went into wind
energy
you ever create a sailboat one sale two
sales three sales
what kind of sale different shape of
sale how do you make the sale how high
should the sale be
right so there's an entire set of
engineering which is just common sense
can you imagine that there's a shape of
a boat that goes through water better
than a different shape of a boat
okay there's there's laminar flow you
know oftentimes you know there's there's
the ratio if i make the boat one foot
wide and 100 feet long it goes faster
that's a crew shell right if i make the
boat 10 feet wide and 40 feet long or 50
feet long well it goes slower but on the
other hand it carries a lot more
stuff right and uh and there's something
called hull speed what you'll find is
that there's a maximum speed at which
you can push push a hole through the
water
it's um it's not a function of the
energy you use it's a function of the
shape of the hole
right common sense create a square
shaped boat right
harder than a needle shaped boat
which has the fastest hull speed it's
when the aspect ratio is 1 to 100 you go
fast when the aspect ratio is one to
five you go slower when the aspect ratio
is one to two
you go slower
what's the best aspect ratio
depends on what you're trying to build
right
what should you do once you figure it
out
make more like that
does the material matter yeah ever see a
butt with rocks
doesn't float as well you know
yeah everything matters
how do you solve the problem right
through being methodical
is it important well it might be a
matter of life and death
so i
look i think the big thing that happened
with regard to bitcoin this year is that
bitcoin is the first is the first point
in human history where engineering
impinged on economics
up until this point people didn't really
embrace the idea of energy theory and
engineering theory and math and sciences
as being integral to the way that a
monetary asset function
you know it used to be money was you
know seashells and tokens and then and
then we have this
general you know we have gold and we
have coins and then we have general
agreements and and uh
and the like and
bitcoin was the first time when we
created um
a digital
monetary asset a pure a pure digital
token on a pure digital network
that that actually uh
respects the laws of conservation of
energy
you know i say it's it's sound money
but that's the same as thermal dynamic
we sound money
which is conservation of energy which
means mathematically proper
we'll get to that in a minute because
those are like really deep concepts that
even i after being in this for a while
struggle with some of those definitions
but so now i want to help people
understand so we're talking about boats
and arrows and there's a certain type of
arrow that works better and it takes a
lot of experimentation there's a boat
and a certain type of boat some of which
you could probably think your way
through like even just as a lay person
looking at a square boat it seems like
okay something doesn't feel right
intuitively
and then i think it was a portugal army
that at one point like took over the
world because they had longer trees
which meant that their boats were faster
and so you get to a point what i want
people to understand about the way you
approach the world is you get to a point
where you can know nothing about it and
say hey somebody tell me
which boat to buy and you're as ignorant
before as you were after but at least
you have if you have a good consultant
you have the right boat but when you
yourself can reason from first
principles now you can act at a moment
of tremendous uncertainty now the reason
i care about this probably important to
articulate that to you
when uh kovic kicked off i had a moment
of panic for because i
first of all i started not poor but i
was broke so i start broke i utterly
transformed my life
i work in the inner cities a lot because
i'm in manufacturing or i was
and so i see these incredible people
that are
destitute because in my opinion they
don't not all of them lack intelligence
because intelligence is evenly
distributed so in any neighborhood
you're going to sort of find the same
distribution of iq but what you won't
find is the right frame of reference
they don't think in the right way and
because they're not thinking in the
right way they get stuck so i become
obsessed with how do i convey mindset to
people so they can think through novel
problems and solve it in a way that
allows them to get out covet hits and
i'm like whoa
the monetary system is blowing up i'm
super
scared for other people that
the basically they have no sense of how
to invest or if inflation is going to go
crazy like how to protect against that
and so i start bringing on financial
experts and none of them could talk at
the street level about like what does
the guy do that's making 52 000 a year
what does that guy do
and none of them had an answer and then
i come across you and you've got this
idea that we're having a once in a
thousand year opportunity with bitcoin
and i'm like i've got to get people to
understand
how you have come to that how you have
come to that conclusion through first
principles
and then like we can get to sort of the
what they should do
so walk through how you go from that
sort of early tweet that you just sent
off as a whatever saying you know
bitcoin is never going to be anything to
like whoa this is real and as a person
and as the ceo of a company i'm going
all in how does that change happen
well the catalytic event is uh
the pandemic
and the events that took place in march
of 2020
and what you saw was main street shut
down
it literally shut down and came to a
grinding halt
and wall street had an initial panic and
a rapid recovery of v-shape recovery and
so we put those two together you had an
l-shape recovery main street just shut
down
and then you had a v-shape recovery and
we call that a k
but what we but if you decompose it and
i was very sensitive to it because on
one hand in my personal life i'm an
investor
and in my public life i run a a main
street company i run a software company
that has people that that manufactures
software that does things
so
what i saw was
if you had um
if you had a large portfolio of stocks
or assets
and you went into this pandemic
uh after the fed uh ended up expanding
the money supply and with the interest
rates going to zero and the expansion of
the m2 monetary base the money base
you found that you were actually 25 30
percent wealthy or doing nothing
you could have done nothing the entire
year as long as like the only mistake
you could have made is do something
right if you if you had a billion
dollars and you did nothing for the
entire year you had 1.3 billion dollars
at the end of the year
on the other hand if you had a main
street company and you're generating
let's say
100 million dollars a year in cash flow
and you're valued at a billion because
of the cash flow you would have to be
generating 130
million
after a year to be valued the same
because the value
uh the assets that the money buy is is
being devalued by 30
if the currency is devalued
at some rate and
you know the money supply expanded to 24
last year so you could use that as your
metric or you could use the s p 500s
return as another metric
but clearly
the currency devalued which means that
if you're a main street company you had
to work 20 percent harder to get nothing
and if you're a wall street company you
had to work you had to do nothing to get
20 better
and so what i saw was a shift in balance
of power you know and a shift in in
wealth
and it was pretty disturbing to me too
you know it's like
you don't want to be uh the dentist
working for a fixed amount of money
that's getting 20 less valuable every
year
so the average person i think struggles
with that because they're like well i'm
getting my stimulus check what do you
mean like how's this going down cost of
breads the cost of bread i'm all good
i think there are some fundamental
misnomers or or
or um
understandings of the world that people
miss and one and the most pernicious one
is the idea that inflation equals cpi
which is consumer price index
average the idea is the number that
for inflation inflation is only two
percent or inflation is one percent or
inflation might be three percent
okay that's just a mistaken idea
um to to
what is inflation inflation is the rate
at which the things you want to buy are
going up in price
and what are the things you want to buy
well you might want to buy pizza you
might want to buy netflix but you might
want to buy a house you might want to
rent a house but if you want to rent a
house it might not go up in price as
much as if you want to buy a house what
if you want to buy a house in the middle
of manhattan it might go up in price
differently than a house in the middle
of kansas
what if i want to buy food what if i
want to buy energy
what if i want to buy a picasso what if
i want to buy something really scarce
what if i want season tickets to you
know the baseball game
what if i want health care what if i
want early retirement they're all things
you can buy you can buy assets
you can buy
luxury service you want to buy a rolex
you want to buy a maserati or a porsche
luxury goods or do you want to buy
commodity goods and there are some
things you don't have to pay for right
there ad finance right streaming youtube
what's that what's the inflation rate on
streaming youtube ad finance
right
so
the inflation is is the cost of stuff
if the money
supply is expanding
that means the currency is devaluing
in a closed system we want to make that
simple
i live in a town and there's a thousand
houses and i and i double the amount of
currency in the town
and everybody wants a house what's the
price of houses do right
if the only thing i can buy is a house
and if i double the amount of currency
then the price of the house must go up
probably go up by two bit but maybe not
exactly by two but it goes up if i
increase the amount of money if i get if
i raise everybody's salary by a factor
of ten
and i keep the number of houses constant
one might
presume that the price of houses will go
up how will inflation actually take
place
well there's a different coefficient
for price
for the price gradient or the change in
price for everything you might want to
buy and it's different at every point in
time
so for example if i put you in lockdown
and i make it illegal to go to the
movies and i make it illegal to go to a
restaurant then the price of restaurants
and movie theaters aren't going to go up
if i if i make it illegal to or or
inappropriate to go on a cruise
and fly in an airplane then the price of
cruise tickets and movie theater tickets
and restaurants they just don't go up
because you can't buy them if you want
to there's no velocity on that money
okay what can you buy you can buy stocks
you can buy crypto
right so what you know what does go up
well if i give you a thousand dollars
and you can go and you can buy stocks
then the price of stocks go up
now what happens um
what happens next well so
everybody gets locked into their
apartment and they decide they really
want a house with
grass so what happened next well 12
weeks after the lockdowns the price of
like suburban housing went up and people
started trying to buy houses they said
this is unprecedented we've never had so
much demand for houses in the suburbs of
new york
well that's not a surprise
you know what if your choices if i close
the parks in the cities
and
you know and and i close your office
then why wouldn't you move out into the
country and live at a house with green
grass right you're not
the utility you're not missing out on a
restaurant you're not missing out on a
park you're not missing out on your job
so rational human behavior causes people
to take their money and go buy things
they want
so and where do they buy them well um
you know hampton's real estate went up
in in price fifty percent
palm beach they go to the places where
they want to go
uh did the price of land in the middle
of north dakota go up by 50
not so much
it's not you know it's not a scarce
desirable asset by people stampeding
so
so what is inflation inflation is a
vector it's not a scalar
a vector means you can calculate for a
thousand different products a thousand
different numbers and they change every
month
so i could give you
a thousand different numbers
uh 12 different times a year and it
would be different in every city
everybody can figure out that in minot
north dakota it's different than
manhattan and it's even different in
manhattan than in brooklyn and it's
different in brooklyn than in upstate
new york so inflation is varying by time
by space and it's varying by every item
and if you want to calculate the
inflation index
you have to construct a market basket of
goods and services and assets that you
would want to acquire
and then i can give you the rate at
which that market basket of goods and
services and assets is changing
every month or every week
and uh
of course that would be different for
every person
so what happened after the lockdowns
well we got hyper inflation in some
things bonds hyperinflated
cost of bonds doubled in three weeks
whoa that's hyper inflation uh equities
inflated you know they were up 40
you know year over year
uh you know cryptos inflated bitcoin was
up three four hundred percent
so
the cost of scarce art the scot the cost
of luxury real estate
all of that stuff inflated you know or
hyper inflated what didn't inflate
things that people can't buy
and and yeah i can define a market i
could define a market basket of things
that don't go up in price by definition
too
right if i define a market basket of
highly manufactured goods that have very
low variable cost
right like
what's the price of your streaming
youtube video or what's the price of
some manufactured box of macaroni
that's five percent food and 95
marketing
right i mean the more ma if i spent two
billion dollars on a fat on a factory
to stamp out widgets that have a
variable cost of 10 percent
right then inflate then i've already
sunk the cost in the factory those
things don't inflate at the same rate as
you know if there's only one
mona lisa in the world and if i increase
the amount of money in the world by a
factor of 100
don't you think that the value of the
mona lisa would go up assuming that lots
of wealthy people wanted it
and that that gets you to the really the
the interesting theory of economics
right if i want to really understand the
anything in the engineering world i need
to use vector
vector calculus right or vector math i
would never use arithmetic you cannot
solve the problem of fluid dynamics with
the arithmetic you can't design a boat
you can't design a plane you can't
design a nuclear reactor and you can't
design a bridge with the arithmetic well
a scalar like oh inflation is two
percent that's arithmetic
right
you know adding it up right uh
isaac newton gave us the calculus of
variations
you know and calculus in general and
pretty much every sophisticated thing
that flies
or floats
you know it's all based upon calculus
and uh
and you just can't solve the problem
without that math so
that's the problem for inflation okay so
let's
inflation is our problem
but we have the confounding variable of
the average person is being told by sort
of the mainstream media by the
government hey inflation's not a problem
they look at their basket of netflix and
bread and whatever and it all seems fine
they're getting their stimulus checked
there's no worry but the reality of
inflation is completely different and
we're now seeing a break in the
narrative from the government saying
well actually
inflation is you know whatever twice
what we thought it was and that may be
just the tip of an iceberg that's coming
so inflation is a problem in two ways
one if you pour money into the system
inflation is going to go up on a certain
set of items and then number two if
you're confused about what inflation is
because it is not simple arithmetic
you're now paralyzed especially when
that's confounded by marketing
essentially
so cool so we've got inflation is sort
of problem number one you're you often
use the analogy of you know if you have
a boat that has a leak in it you've got
a real problem and if you know that
inflation at some level exists you've
already got a problem
so when did you begin to think
okay i've got this
in fact what i'm really the the part
that i find so intriguing about your
story is when you turn to wall street
and we're like i have a profitable
company it is wildly profitable
and yet wall street does not like it
dear wall street why do you not like my
company and the answer to this is so
revealing
yeah the company was valued at like one
times revenue plus uh cash
and uh
i said well i have i have 500 million in
cash
why don't we get more credit and the
answer is cash is trash
like it's ray dalio's quote cash is
trash well why is cash trash
well if the money supply is expanding at
seven percent a year then then the
risk-free hurdle rate is seven percent
if you don't generate more than seven
percent yield on your cash then it's
devaluing
so from 2010 to 2020 the money supply
expanded seven percent
so all the cash you're holding is losing
seven percent of its value
um
assuming you have a zero percent
interest rate or zero yield on the cash
so you can imagine the traditional world
you invest your cash at three percent
treasury yields and you get a minus
seven and it's like a minus four percent
and divide four into 72 and
you know and somewhere
15 20 years out you're going to lose
half of the shareholder value in the
treasury if you do that
people might hold their nose but after
march of 2000
the money supply is expanding at 24
the interest rate's zero
so now you have to put a forecast in
place at what rate will the the money
supply expand if it expands at 20 a year
and you're going to generate zero in
treasury yield
then you're looking at cutting your
treasury purchasing power in half in
three and a half years whoa okay now
that's not trivial so
you have to find a way if you're gonna
if you're gonna have assets to get over
the hurdle rate another way to say it is
i have to invest it in a strategy which
is going to appreciate faster than the
money
is devalued
if the money is devalued at seven
percent a year then the s p 500 index
better yield nine or ten percent if it
yields ten percent and the money
devalues it seven percent your plus
three you can save money
in an s p 500 index fund
you can't save money with bonds unless
unless you're buying bonds and the
interest rates keep getting uh reduced
if you if you bought a bond at four
percent yield and the interest rate got
taken down to three and a half the bond
uh trades up and when the interest rate
goes down to three it trades up again
and when it goes down to two and a half
it trades up again when the bond rates
get or the libor uh you know the
short-term bond rate and interest rate
goes to zero you can't take it down
anymore so bonds won't hold value either
so now you're in a conundrum i have a
lot of assets but i'm not beating the
hurdle rate and the hurdle just
tripled this is the problem that a
company that's cash rich
uh has and it's a problem that anybody
that works for a salary has
which is i generally cash and the cat
the currency is being devalued uh every
year the real question is what's the
rate which is devalued
and
in that let's do the thought experiment
what if uh what if we didn't print any
more money
what if the inflation rate the monetary
inflation rate not the cpi but what if
the money expansion rate was zero
in that case uh the currency is also an
asset and it's a store of value and a
medium of exchange at the same time
that's a complete
austrian economics like deflationary
economy where we have call it hard money
or sound money the closest thing to that
would be the gold standard
if the government said you can exchange
your money for gold at any time and
we'll keep gold equal to the amount of
money and we won't print any more money
well that puts you on a hard money
standard
in that case you could just store your
money in a bank and it would be more
valuable in the future not less valuable
when the government goes off the gold
standard and we went off the gold
standard
explicitly in 1971
now the currency is losing some percent
of its purchasing power every year
because it's being inflated away and
what's the number well it was about
seven percent a year
and now it's like 20 percent a year and
it's 15 to 20 percent a year and you
know you got to figure out is it 15 20
or 25 but
if it's 15 to 20 the currency is
weakening one to two percent a month
when it gets to be 40 to 50 it's
collapsing that's argentina
or worse so you've either got a country
where the currency is weakening or our
country where the the currency is
collapsing
when that happens
now you have a decomposition the money
is broken into two components you have a
currency component which you use as a
legal medium of exchange like the dollar
or the euro or the yen
or the remember
and then you have an asset component
which you use as a store of value over
the over the long term
money or us dollars have ceased to be a
store of value for at least the past
decade since the great financial crisis
so what people did was they stampeded
into etfs and index funds
right and to a certain extent bonds
right how do you store your value over
the long term well if i if i take
money and i buy a mixture of stocks and
bonds
that will store my value because
if uh if the economy is healthy the
bonds the stocks go up by 10 a year the
s p does
and if the market uh the economy is not
healthy the fed will lower the interest
rates
by 50 basis points and the bond will
trade up
and so that works for how long it works
and watch the interest rates for the
last decade it works until you crank the
interest rates down to zero
the it used to be overnight money was
550 basis points tom
before the great financial crisis
and then they cranked it down from 550
to 500 to 450 to 400 to 350 to 300 to
250 to 200 to 150 to 100 to 50 to zero
and now we have uh you know the banker
say i'm not even thinking about thinking
about raising interest rates
so
that breaks bonds as a store of value
unless you go negative interest rates
and uh stocks stocks work except for the
fact that you know
what stocks worked in the past decade
apple amazon facebook google
a big tech company that grows 20 percent
a year top line
when apple stopped growing 20 percent of
your top line they fixed it by taking on
massive amounts of debt buying their
stock back and leveraging up their eps
so
so companies that grow faster than the
rate of monetary inflation faster than
the seven percent they could hold value
a company growing twenty percent like
google facebook or amazon they all hold
value in fact they accrete value
why because 20 is more than seven
right
it's plus 13 a year right
um
what how what happens to all those all
the other companies which companies in
the s p 500 amounted to all the indexes
to all the gains it was big tech right
big fang stocks were the winners
everybody else treads water because if
you're growing at seven percent
and the money supply is is collapsing at
seven percent you're net zero
and how else do you get around it well
you can go borrow a lot of money
leverage up buy back half your stock and
get your cash flow per share up
but what what happens when you're fully
leveraged which is like where they are
right now you can't do it anymore
so
what's the problem
right now the problem today is
the currency is is being devalued at 20
a year not 7 a year
right that's i turned up the heat in the
frying pan
and the second problem is
some stocks could hope to grow twenty
percent a year
like the minority five percent of them
could grow twenty percent a year for the
past decade what percentage of stocks
can grow 30 percent a year
because now you got to grow 30 or 35
year because the hurdle rate just jumped
now you're pushed out on the risk on the
risk uh curve here you got to take a
massive risk as a company to grow that
fast
you got to do acquisitions you got to
you got to burn the candle on both ends
you got to take on massive new leverage
this is squeezing
value stocks don't work right i mean it
squeezes you out of the value stock
trade because if the company is reliable
and it's growing its cash flows five
percent a year and the money supply is
expanding at twenty percent a year cash
is trash
back to my story right why is cash trash
because i had a value stock with a lot
of cash and the money supplies expanding
looking from the point of an investor
they can invest in the s p 500 index or
the nasdaq and that those were all up
like 40 percent year over year or
something
you know or they could hold cash and get
zero percent
nobody wants the old cash and so they
might as well just take it and put it
into something else
now long term
you can get a bump on equities uh when
you have a boost when interest rates get
spiked down you saw it when we flood the
market with liquidity initially that
makes stocks go up
but let's take the example of zimbabwe
and argentina if i keep doing it for 10
years what happens to those stocks
they don't go up
right the problem over time is stocks
are valued based upon the discounted
value the cash flows or at least in part
and so if i give you a company
generating 100 million in cash every
year for the next decade but i tell you
there'll be ten times as much money in
the economy in a decade that hundred
million dollars of cash will only be
worth ten one tenth as much in a decade
so you the discount rate
is jumping which means the value of the
cash flows into the future is collapsing
the road to serfdom is working
exponentially harder for a currency
growing exponentially weaker
and so how do you solve the problem
and the solution to the problem is you
convert your assets from a weak currency
that's inflating into a strong currency
or a strong asset if you will that is
deflating
right
the simplest example is
i'm a wealthy business person in
argentina and the peso is trading three
to the dollar three pesos to the dollar
and the year is 2003.
and now i can go forward and i tell you
well in the year 2020 the peso's going
to trade 150 to the dollar on the on the
blue market or the black market that's
going to be the real rate
so what's your best
strategy work hard
invest diversify into other argentine
companies making pesos
no
your best strategy is convert all your
existing pesos into dollars and get it
out of the country
and your next best strategy is forward
finance your cash flows
and convert those into dollars get them
out of the country
and your next strategy is sell equity in
your ranch or your business in pesos in
2003 at three to one three pesos of the
dollar and then buy dollars because the
dollar is going to go up by a factor of
50.
so what you're doing is you're financing
in a weak currency and then you're
converting into a strong currency
and that's pretty obvious if you lived
in zimbabwe or if you live lebanon went
from 150
lebanese uh lyra to 707
it went from 1500 to 7500 overnight whoa
so it means you lost 80 percent of your
money if you had it in a lebanese bank
and so the answer of course is convert
your lira while it's 1500 to the dollar
into dollars
before the devaluation
right now what can you do if you're a
modern business person right if i can't
convert to dollars the next best thing
is buy something tangible that won't
lose 80 percent of its value overnight
buy a boat
by land
traditionally people bought other
tangible assets gold
right something like that but if you buy
an asset which is valued based upon its
expected future cash flows that are in
that collapsing currency that doesn't
work for you
like you could own a every good business
in
in venezuela
how's that going to help you when the
venezuelan currency collapses by a
factor of a million
it won't
okay so what's bitcoin well bitcoin is
the strongest asset the human race has
ever invented it's like gold with none
of the defects of gold so define what
the defects are why why is it the
greatest
monetary invention
so i buy a million dollars of gold
okay um
if the price goes up the gold miners
first of all the gold miners are going
to create more gold and dump it on the
market
if i could eliminate uh all gold mining
forever if i could wave a magic wand and
make it impossible to mine anymore gold
my million dollars a goal will hold its
value better because it'll be scarce
but gold miners are inflating the value
of the supply of gold by at least two
percent a year or so
and then if the price doubles again
investors will invest in more gold
miners and they'll create more capacity
to mine coal
so you'll create capacity to mine gold
you'll mine the gold you'll crank up the
rate at which the gold mines function
after that people with gold jewelry will
melt their jewelry down converted to
gold bullion and sell it right if the
price of gold went up by a factor of 20
you would be like converting all your
gold stuff into gold bullion because it
seems like a good idea
they call it scrap gold right
and then after that um bankers will
issue gold warrants and gold and gold
paper and gold derivatives and they'll
sell them short without the gold because
they can speculate in it and they don't
have to have a one for one coverage of
gold to the gold derivatives
and so that's called hypothecation and
rehypothecation
okay if it keeps going up the
government's holding gold will start to
sell some of their gold to manipulate
the price down
right and all of these
and if and ultimately if it goes up
enough someone will club you over the
head and take your gold or a hostile
regime will take your gold or a
politician will pass a law taxing your
gold
right there's there's a lot of ways you
lose gold because it's physical
how do you cure the problem
right i mean
here's how you cure the problem you make
it impossible to mine any more gold and
then you make it possible to take
custody of your gold personally off of
the exchange or off of the bank
so that way the bank can't hypothecate
it or re-hypothecate it miners can't
inflate it investors can't create any
more gold miners and then you make it
possible to move it from here to
switzerland or singapore in an hour for
for a nickel
and that way if you don't like your bank
or don't trust your bank
if the state of new york passes a law
taxing it you move it to state of
wyoming
you know if the government passes the
law taxing you know the the ownership of
uh land in california you can't move the
land out of california can you
if you have a million dollars of gold in
a bank and in a vault in new york city
you know there's only a couple places
you can move it you can move it to
london if you have six months
okay so you're gonna be subject to the
law of london or the law of
new york can you actually move to your
favorite island or you know can you move
to the cayman islands and bury your gold
underneath your hut in the cayman
islands and be safe about it
not likely
can't even get it through the airport
right so
so the problem with other properties and
gold is the simplest example but the
problem the the challenge or the analogy
holds with any property
i give you a bunch of money and i tell
you you want to keep it and give it to
your grandchild
do you buy
a building in manhattan do you buy a
ranch in california do you buy a stack
of gold bars do you buy shares in a
company headquartered in san francisco
do you buy bonds issued by a government
or company or do you buy bitcoin
and you can you can see the problem of
course is
the the debt is devaluing rapidly
the land in california can be taxed and
is not movable
you know
uh
the building in new york is not going
anywhere it might be valuable to a rich
person that lives in new york what about
a rich person lives in beijing do they
want your building in new york
how are you going to hide your building
right buildings get properly taxed
there's a very famous story about you
know a bunch of luxury you know yachts
sitting in sardinian port and the locals
decided that that it wasn't fair
that all these uh people were rich
people were sitting on their yachts in
the port spending all this money but
they weren't paying enough taxes now
they're putting millions and millions of
euros into the economy
but
they came up with the idea that they
were going to put a tax on the yacht on
the value of the yacht
and so they you know they passed the
yacht tax that would have cost people
millions or tens of millions of euros if
they stayed in that port
and uh everything was happy and uh all
the restauranters and the hotelers and
and and the entertainment people and the
port they were all happy making tons of
money off the yachts until the day
before the tax went into place and the
morning that the tax went into place the
port was empty and the economy died
every left
because yachts are floating capital it
just moves it's floating property right
so it's it's a very visible example
right why it's not that smart to put a
an unfair tax or an extreme tax on a
yacht
if people can float the yacht to the
next port you know 100 miles to the left
so
one would be discouraged
from taxing stuff that floats
on the other hand taxing a building
that's buried you know 100 feet down in
the bedrock that's easier you can't move
the building so
bitcoin represents the apex property
rights of the human race
like i'm not mind you i'm not disputing
the ability or or the you know
legitimacy of a government to pass the
tax at the end of the day they can tax
your gold they can tax your stocks your
bonds your building yourself your income
whatever they want
but the point really is
you're a lot more likely to tax the
stuff that you walk past
you know every day on the way to work
and you're a lot
and
legitimately you can move yourself
and you can move your property if it's
crypto
to another jurisdiction but you can't
legitimately move a ranch in california
so
your property rights are stronger and
the value of the property is higher
right you have a valuable thing in
manhattan it's interesting to other
wealthy people in manhattan but when you
have bitcoin it's interesting to wealthy
people everywhere on earth
right it's you can liquidate a billion
dollars of bitcoin on the weekend in any
currency
you know any any time
try liquidating a billion dollar
building
right that's three year process right so
it's liquid it's fungible it's desirable
and so that what that's what makes the
asset valuable and it's very it's the
it's the most difficult thing to impair
tom once i had a million dollars seized
by the argentine government here's how
it happened i had a million dollars in a
bank in argentina in dollars and it was
a u.s bank
um
on on one day they simply passed the law
converting it all to pesos and they and
they converted everybody's everybody's
account to pesos in the country
and the next day they devalued the peso
ten to one
and 24 hours after they'd you know
done that i had 100 000 whereas had a
million before
and they did it
i mean they did it quickly and easily to
everybody in the country
now
in theory you know that if if it had
been property they would have had to
pass a law seizing 90 of the property of
everybody in the country
that would not be so popular right to
seize the property
and if they wanted to seize 90 of the
property of everything in the country
they would have had to subpoena a court
in new york or
delaware
and get my appearance right and there
would have been three four five years of
lawsuits going on and if you really
wanted to take something you have to
kidnap everybody and take them to jail
and sweat their private keys out of them
and that's not very practical right so
at the end of the day
it's not likely that uh
that the governments of all the world
will just confiscate
of your of your crypto assets or your
bitcoin
but in fact it's a foregone conclusion
that they're definitely going to
compensate 90 of your currency
right it's happening at one percent a
month or two percent a month right now
so all you got to do is wait between
five and ten years and you're going to
lose 90 percent of your purchas of your
money if it's in
if it's in a currency or a currency
derivative and they don't even have to
pass a law
so when all of this kicked off i'm a
relatively bright guy but when all of
this kicked off
um
i told my and this being kovit i told my
money manager i said look i want to be
as close to my money being buried in the
backyard as humanly possible and she
just kept saying you don't understand
inflation like this is going to be a
problem like your money will go down in
value
and i was like i get it but i feel like
it's happening slowly enough that
i've got time to like get my head
together like this is so disruptive and
so um you know bill gates predicted it
so i won't say it was unpredictable but
it was
so surprising and unlike anything i had
ever lived through i just didn't know
what was going to happen and i didn't
understand money markets well enough or
finance in general i'd always better
myself as an entrepreneur so i
understand how to build business i
understand how to create wealth but
maintaining it is like a whole another
thing that honestly
i know a little bit about now i knew
nothing about it then so i just kept
saying look get me as close to buried in
the backyard as i can then i come across
you
and you talk about hurdle rate
and then i was like oh my god this isn't
something i've got 30 years to figure
out this is something i have four years
to figure out to get to like a halfway
point to where i've already lost 50 of
my wealth so i was like whoa
now i have to take action so now i start
researching like crazy okay
is it going to be crypto is it going to
be specifically bitcoin is it going to
be something else
and
this idea of
creating basically turning sunlight into
cryptographically protected
money is a
very
interesting idea and so i'd like to know
now so those are all the reasons why
like there's you can protect yourself
from the government um but
you have a compelling argument as to why
i should be willing to stomach sort of
short-term volatility and why because
that's like the argument if i'm that
average person on the street i'm like yo
literally last week this lost like 30 or
40 percent of its value so that's
terrifying so why would i be better off
in that
than you know even a bond with a
negative yield at least like i'm
bleeding to death more slowly than the
35 loss or whatever that i just took
over the last week well bitcoin's the
best performing asset for the past
decade and it's you know it's
100x better than gold and it's 10x
better than
equity portfolios
so
the volatility is the price you pay for
the performance that you get
and oftentimes the best investment idea
isn't the most comfortable investment
idea um
i
i think um if i told you there's a
hundred percent certainty you're going
to lose seven percent of your money over
the course of a year
you might think well you know
i have a decade before i lose half of my
money i have time to think about it
that's that's the status quo when
monetary inflation seven percent
if i told you there's a hundred percent
probability that you're going to lose 20
percent of your money over the next year
and half of your money over the next
three years
well i mean you might think you need to
move faster well what if i told you
you're gonna lose all your money what if
i told you the currency is going to
collapse to zero
in three months
which is kind of what it did in zimbabwe
and venezuela well what have i told you
we're going to have 95 percent inflation
i think the unofficial inflation rate in
argentina is like 85 percent this year
what if i told you we're gonna have
hyper inflation
everything will be twice as expensive
next year
now how long would you wait before you
took a risk
i i you know if i really want to you
know get you to jump out of the pot
right i could just
make it simple next tuesday i'm seizing
all your money
or you can spend it between now and next
tuesday right what i mean that really uh
what is the word
focus one right
right it strengthens one stiffens one
spine and focuses one if i just made it
very black and white i'm just going to
take all your money next tuesday or you
can spend it between now and then so
how do you actually um
get comfortable with the volatility well
i think first you have to get you have
to understand how big your problem is
and the second thing is one of time
horizon
and what do you what's your aspirational
goal for example
if you're if you don't aspire to change
your lifestyle one iota
and you know you're gonna watch netflix
let's take a stream you're going to live
in your parents basement watch netflix
order domino's pizza and stream youtube
video for the rest of your life do you
have an inflation problem coming
probably not
if you want to if you want to buy your
own house
you have a bigger inflation problem
because housing went up 15
if you want to get married buy a house
have three kids and if you know if you
want to take expensive vacations and
have a have a house on the lake
you have a big inflation problem guess
what luxury homes on the lake went up in
price a lot same with education if i
plan to send those kids to school i'm
really in trouble yeah so it really
comes down to what is your aspiration
and that that determines your hurdle
rate i mean
what you want determines your inflation
rate and your inflation rate determines
your hurdle rate and that makes a
difference
i think
in terms of historic metaphors i mean
there's plenty for example
my family came to um
to the united states in 1736 on a wooden
ship
okay and if you if you want to go study
those voyages they spent eight weeks
have you ever tried there's not a single
person that's like probably got in a
wooden ship with three sails for eight
weeks to cross the north atlantic in
order to come to america the mortality
rate is like
two to five percent on that trip
the mortality rate to go from europe to
the far east is like 35
it's insane
like one out of three people that
started the journey dies on the trip
whoa
okay so
you know we talk about volatility is
bitcoin bumpy is crypto
we're just talking about bitcoin yeah
bitcoin is bumpy what else is bumpy uh
wooden ships
in 15 foot c's
if you want the definition of a rocky
ride
the the rocky ride was was leaving
europe so
why'd they so you're saying that the
bold are the ones rewarded
if you choose correctly
right i mean the ones that move too soon
you know went to certain colonies you
know that
on the potomac river and the james river
and they died right so there's a lot of
early settlers took arrows in their back
you know in the 1600s
on the other hand uh by the mid 17 1700s
by 1736 you know people have been living
in in north america and you had
philadelphia
and you had massachusetts successful
colony and the like so
if you choose the right decision or make
the right decision at the right time you
can have a better life but there's still
risk
right so why the people come from europe
they came for property rights and civil
rights
right they either couldn't exercise
their religion or there was no hope for
them all the property was owned by
someone else
and you know property rights matter if i
a lot of people don't realize
this they think that they think that
property rights are nice to have
property rights are a nice to have the
same way that that fat on your frame or
an insulin are nice to have if i strip
away your insulin you're a type 1
diabetic you can't form fat
if you can't form fat you can eat all
day long and you're going to starve to
death
it's not a nice to have to store to
store energy over time fat is an organic
energy battery and property is a social
energy battery so being able to store
property means i can go three months
without a job and not starve
and live and live a life there is no
hope for a civil life without property
so
you know people went from europe to the
us for property when they got to the
east coast they went west it's in the
american ethos was there a bumpy ride
taking a wagon train over the rocky
mountains
you ever fly over the rocky mountains
and looked down
before they had the railroad and before
they had the highways and then you ask
how did people actually cover the turf
it's like
yes it was a bumpy ride
there was volatility along the way
you know i think the risk and the
discomfort today of owning bitcoin is a
heck of a lot less
than the risk and the discomfort of
getting in a ship
or getting on a horse
or you know getting on a wagon or
walking
right or settling
and doing what you need to in order to
secure your civil rights and your
property rights and your freedom
but um
there is an analogy
um the only way you make the volatility
go away is you make the opportunity go
away
the reason you went west was because
people weren't living there and you
wanted thousands of acres to yourself to
live a better life right
and when you got there you found that
there was no one that would come before
you to you know to clear the thing you
know and build a house for you and give
you running water and hand the keys to
you
and do your bidding
because
you know you're going to a new place
that was where the opportunity was
so i think it's very
it's very uh quintessential to the
american spirit or the or the
entrepreneurial spirit or or just the
human spirit
you know what about immigrants a nation
made of immigrants people went from a
country where they had nothing to a
country where they could have something
that's the story that you see over and
over again
is it volatility is there a risk yeah
always
right um is there opportunity
yeah when do you leave
look the i mean the rich first sons of
the nobles in europe didn't come
yeah
it was the poor disenfranchised
the the people that uh that didn't have
a choice that came
right that the protestants left catholic
countries the catholics left protestant
countries
the poor left every country those who
are you know hoping for a better
life came
and you know if you're if you're sitting
wealthy with
lots and lots of stuff and a comfortable
life
style
and a comfortable portfolio you might
not see the same impedance right you
wouldn't have the same inspiration
to do something it's interesting so the
humanitarian side of this is one of the
things that i find more fascinating
about the bitcoin movement um there is
something very encouraging about the
fact that all the people in my life that
came to me with this saying tom you
really have to look at this we're young
people um you know
the level of awareness that they have
had that and i have a lot of employees
that sort of straddle
are they the low low end of um gen
millennials are they the upper end of
gen z you know i guess it depends on
where you split it but they're sort of
early 20s
and uh you know they're looking at this
as like hey this is this is the
opportunity our generation has been
looking for there's finally a moment
where we can really capture some upside
we're young enough that if we sort of
invest poorly it should be fine that we
should be able to make this money back
up they buy into the ethos of only
invest what you're prepared to lose you
know these aren't guys that are doing
things on leverage
and so
that is is very hopeful you know when
you talk about the beginning of the
pandemic was this wealth transfer to
people that basically owned bonds and
assets and now with
you know hopefully this sort of
prolonged and i think that's an
important thing to note is yes there's
volatility to bitcoin in the short term
i've heard you say if you're looking at
a number in anything less than a four
year increment it's just noise and that
once you extend out to four years and
beyond suddenly it actually becomes a
story of you know growing i think it's
like 200 percent year over year um which
is you know pretty thrilling
um how far does when you think about
this being sort of the apex
property
how much goes into just the the fact
that it's taking sunlight and turning it
into something that's cryptographically
protected and how much of that stance is
that this evens the playing field
you know i think a bitcoin is like
that shining city in cyberspace
where billions of people will eventually
want to live
right instead of moving from europe to
america or moving from the old world to
the new world or whatever we're moving
from
the planet to cyberspace we can't move
to outer space yet i can't get a billion
people off the planet and settle on a
better earth
but i can move a billion people to
cyberspace
bitcoin is property in cyberspace
it's 21 million city blocks in cyber
manhattan
um
the people that move there first
right get to buy the land cheapest
and then event you know how many people
will eventually want to live there
well unlike manhattan where there's a
limit there's really no limit why
wouldn't everybody want to live there
right i mean
i don't know that there won't be other
cities in cyberspace that that might
meet other needs i mean i suppose if the
chinese
you know made it illegal to own bitcoin
but there was a chinese bitcoin there
might be a chinese version of bitcoin in
cyberspace kind of like
alibaba you know and ant and and wechat
kind of branched off from facebook and
google and amazon
so there might be some other digital
dominant monetary networks or dominant
monetary networks but but bitcoin is the
greatest
the greatest um monetary network that
the human race has ever developed and
it's certainly the dominant one right
now and it looks like it's going to be
continued to be the dominant one
for as long as we live
so um
what makes it uh
dominant
well i mean clearly the the architecture
is uh proof of work or in other words
throwing up a wall of encrypted energy
right it's all of uh the crypto hash
power
that's channeling energy through the
hashing function which creates
uh creates the stability and the
security
and so
it's based upon the architecture
but um but ultimately the appeal of it
is that it's an open permissionless
protocol that everybody on earth can
engage in
anybody can mine it anybody can so
anybody can contribute security to the
network
and anybody can run their own node and
anybody can own it and then any company
uh can plug into it
and so
there's nothing that open there is not
there is no monetary protocol or asset
or currency that is so open
as the bitcoin asset and so that's
what's driving its value right now
it's
it's an opportunity for people that are
that have little
that have uh little to lose and much to
gain it's all it's an option for
everybody though i mean the way i think
of it is
it's a moral imperative a technical
imperative and an economic imperative
morally it's an imperative because it's
it's the best hope for 8 billion people
to secure their property rights if i
give you a 50 android phone you can
carry around in the android wallet your
property
and no bank
or no hostile regime can seize it
and we've never and that's the best
property right you're ever going to get
i think it's a technical imperative for
the same reason you've got 8 billion
mobile phones that will all have
property and so what's more important
storing your photos and your videos on
your mobile phone or storing all your
money
all your life force on your mobile phone
i mean you're worried about losing the
photos you took on your iphone you
worried about losing your life savings
clearly it's more valuable so
so it's a it's a technology imperative
for an apple and amazon and google and
facebook and companies like square and
paypal and binance and coinbase are
already extraordinarily successful by
embracing it you can see that right now
and finally it's an economic imperative
because there's 500 trillion dollars
worth of uh fiat derivatives cash and
bonds and stocks and real estate that's
valued based upon cash flows and all of
those things are being devalued at one
percent a month
something so we can go back and forth
over what's the rate of currency
expansion but
you know it's it's not that hard to see
that this is a 25 to 50 trillion dollar
a year problem
for anybody with assets on earth
it's very rare that you find it a
technology that's the solution to every
rich person's problem and every poor
person's problem simultaneously
what do you say to people that that say
um the pushback i've seen on bitcoin is
hey guys sorry i get why you're excited
about it but it's the netscape of crypto
and uh you know just as a
technological layer it was early cool
yay thanks for sort of proving the model
but this is never gonna last people will
build something way better
yeah well netscape didn't make it to a
trillion dollars in market value in 10
years
right
if we if we calculate the amount of
monetary energy on the network bitcoin
would be more successful than google
facebook amazon apple or microsoft
in fact it would be more and it's you
know
much more successful than than netscape
or aol or anything from that genre
those things never got to 1 100th
right i think netscape you know at its
peak you know
was maybe 120th 130th 140th of what
we're seeing in front of us right now
and uh
the the difference really is
there is no other
uh there is no technology
and architecture
that's uh that's
appropriate to replace it the solution
to the issue of long-duration asset
or long-duration safe haven store of
value is is a very secure crypto asset
network and so bitcoin is the single
most secure
network in the world
it's the most secure database in the
world it's the most secure asset in the
world the way that you make it secure is
through the extraordinary
decentralization
combined with uh the way that it uh that
it converts energy into a very special
specialized sha-256 hash function
so in order to attack that network it
would take extraordinary time and effort
and energy and resources
it's pretty much the most secure thing
we've got in cyberspace and what about
people that look at that and go yes cool
you've built this amazing protective
layer but it comes at the cost of the
environment the actual cost is um
you know
nominally 0.1 percent of the energy used
in the world
but the economic value of the energy is
not even 10 basis points it's like three
basis points so you're talking about
like
it's almost if you put it on a sheet of
paper it'll be like a couple of dots but
you can't even see it
the uh the overall energy generated in
the in the economy is like 160
terawatt hours and the wasted energy is
50 000 terawatt hours and bitcoin is
120 out of 50 000
wasted energy so it really is
insignificant as an energy load on the
environment
but if you dig a bit deeper you'll find
that actually bitcoin is much cleaner
energy than all the rest of the
applications cars planes trains
automobiles it's pretty obvious uh
planes use fossil fuels
there's no hope for them not to
bitcoin doesn't bitcoin is actually
something that runs on electricity it
doesn't run on fossil fuels
you know most cars still use fossil
fuels and even electric cars are charged
at charging stations that are charged
with fossil fuels so
so the environmentalists ultimately are
going to focus upon the energy grid and
if they want to shut down fossil fuels
or change the energy mix away from coal
or something they'll do that
bitcoin
is the highest value application
of energy
on a wholesale basis that we have in the
world there's nothing
nothing more valuable there's no more
valuable use of energy than bitcoin the
latest generation of shaw 256 miners
they will generate almost 45 cents a
kilowatt hour in value
which means you can take them anywhere
on earth to the north pole you can put a
nuclear reactor on the north pole and
run and run bitcoin mining from it you
can plug them into wind generators a
thousand miles out into a desert you can
plug them into geothermal on an island
like iceland
and you can generate 45 cents kilowatt
hour
the typical residential electricity cost
is 13 cents a kilowatt hour industrial
usage in the first world is 11 cents a
kilowatt hour
and all that energy has to be co-located
with the factories and the people
right we don't you know we don't have an
application an industrial application of
energy like bitcoin that you can put
anywhere on earth so what's the result
the result is that bitcoin is used to
recycle stranded energy or wasted energy
if you have um if you have a
hydroelectric dam and you have a lot of
energy but you don't have people to use
it well the dam
is generating energy year round but the
people don't need it but maybe a few
months a year or maybe they don't need
it in the evening that's needed during
the day to run their air conditioners
like air conditioning is a great example
of a cycling energy use
bitcoin is perfect a perfect energy
battery because you can run it at night
while the people are asleep and the air
conditioning is off and so you level out
energy consumption on the grid thereby
driving down the cost of energy for
everybody on earth
and for any any plant that would
otherwise be decommissioned you have a
use for it if you don't want to
decommission it and of course as you can
imagine uh the sun shines in the desert
where people don't live and the wind
blows in places where people don't live
and volcanoes you know and geothermal
energy exists where people don't want to
live
those are three sources of energy
they're all sustainable renewable energy
but
if you know anything about a power
engineering you know you can't move
electricity more than 500 miles on a
grid
period it's a hard stop a hard limit if
you happen to find geothermal energy
more than 500 miles from manhattan
we don't need it
and and news flash we've already got too
much energy
right so even if you found geothermal
energy in the middle of central park we
still don't need it
and so
what if i told you tom i've actually got
infinite free sustainable energy
and it's a thousand miles away from a
city
what are you gonna do with it well i
mean the the only obvious thing to do
with is bitcoin mining
so bitcoin is migrating to the ends of
the earth
to the most sustainable energy which is
also the cheapest energy which is also
the greenest energy
and um and it's a solution
to the problem of how do we catalyze
sustainable energy how do we get green
it's also a solution to every country's
problem you know you're in the middle of
africa with a waterfall and no industry
what's your best how are you going to
lift your people out of poverty
you plug you know a turbine into your
waterfall you plug bitcoin mining into
the turbine and now you have cheap uh
cheap energy plus that's green that's
plugged into a clean
hard currency exporter
that pays taxes that elevates you out of
poverty
that's environmentally friendly so i
i think that's a good story here people
just don't they don't understand
right just how powerful bitcoin is as a
force for for energy sustainability yeah
i would agree with that like the the
attacks upon it from an environmental
standpoint are relentless and to be
honest i just sort of brushed them off
based on the facts that you've given it
seemed like wait people just don't
understand the narrative or they don't
understand the facts they've fallen for
a narrative
and
until elon musk who's sort of the king
of clean energy for the love of god uh
came out and expressed concerns over the
environmental impact of bitcoin um
how is it possible if everything that
you just said is true that somebody so
into the world of clean energy could be
against it
i think we've got a lot of education to
do
the the industry hasn't published um
transparent statistics about the nature
of the energy usage in bitcoin mining
because the bitcoin miners are very
decentralized
and so
and so um
encouraging transparency and gathering
all the data and publishing it that will
be helpful because
because there's a good story here i
think that the the the the mining of the
energy usage is not well understood
for example three years ago someone
thought that energy was used in
transactions
and then they thought since energy is
used in transactions if we scale up the
number of transactions eventually
bitcoin will boil the ocean
and uh that wasn't true either
because the bitcoin network never
increases the number of transactions and
then the energy usage is unrelated to
transactions and in fact the energy
usage is decreasing exponentially
as as the transactions scale in
efficiency exponentially but the model
was flawed and so people picked it up
and no one's published a better model so
so we need to
and if you only spend an hour
thinking about it or spend a few hours
you might not understand the nuances
so i think that the industry needs to do
a better job of transparently
communicating the current usage of
energy
and transparently communicating how it's
going to change over the next 20 years
bitcoin energy usage for example is
exponentially falling that the latest
generation of miners generate five x as
many hashes for the same amount of
electricity
so in fact energy consumption decreases
eighty percent per extra hash whoa it's
massive
and then after the next halving it gets
cut in half again
and the protocol keeps cutting it in
half every four years
and the technology advances are doubling
it every year
or more right and so if i double every
year and i cut in half every four years
and uh the transactions uh the
transaction efficiency is only our
transaction cost is only scaling with
the log of the price
i mean most people can't do the
logarithmic math in their head but if
you if you actual and they don't know
the ratio between transaction fees and
block rewards but once you figure it out
let me boil it down to the summary
it's 200 basis points of of the value on
the network today
falling to 120
falling to 70
falling to 40
falling to 20 falling to 10 falling to
seven basis points going to six to five
you know eventually getting to five
basis points
and that and and as it's falling to five
basis points of the overall um
monetary energy in the network
the energy mix is rotating
from
more fossil fuel to less fossil fuel
and at the same time
the energy intensity is falling because
the
security on the network is coming
proportionally more from the technology
of the hash
the hashing miners than it is coming
from raw
power and so there's there's a lot of
things going on there
you know if you're a journalist you just
write click bait right
and i think that they came across there
might be an example of one power plant
there was a fossil fuel power plant that
was that was used to to run bitcoin
miners and so that became a very
colorful story
well what about all of the hash rate
well it also got pretty colorful when
when on twitter uh
you and elon musk were sort of going
back and forth and i'm actually really
impressed by the way and i don't know if
this speaks to your vision into stoicism
and having stoic values but the fact
that elon was razzing you may be the
most generous uh interpretation on
twitter about sort of your views on
bitcoin and energy and all that but then
like i don't know three or four days
later you introduce him to miners in the
u.s that are really making strides into
being green
um i'm curious
what one why not
if somebody's coming at you like that
why were you so generous is it that you
see yourself as as a an ambassador to
bitcoin and it didn't make sense to get
into a pissing contest or is there
something else going on
well first of all i think elon believes
in the power of crypto for human freedom
and sovereignty and sound money
i mean he understands the importance
of the underlying technology and he also
believes in bitcoin that's why he bought
billions of dollars of it
right so he believes that
and so we all we all agree on 99 percent
right the power of technology to make
the world a better place the power of
sound money the power of responsibility
the importance of freedom and property
rights the importance of
decentralization we all agree on that
um and so
elon has concerns
that we should be the good guys which
means make sure that we pursue it in a
sustainable fashion that's good for the
planet and so
you know he he wants to encourage
everybody uh to be on the right side of
of the energy debate so
uh there's not a lot of transparency and
i think the industry was uh
not as organized as it could be
so i said to him have you met the miners
they'd love to hear from you and can we
work together and he said i would love
to work together i'd love to meet the
miners
and so
so
when people agree with you on 99
of your agenda and they have concerns
and and bitcoin has either real or
imagined energy issues right
they're either real someone could fire
up a coal power plant and someone and
people don't care for that and then
imagine maybe people are worried that
it's going on more than it is going on
or they're worried about the future
so
the mature responsible thing to do when
you have real and imagined problems is
to is to
bring everybody together in order to
talk about your issues and solve your
problems you know in the most
transparent responsible fashion we can
so
so he was enthusiastic to meet them
their enthusiastic meet him
we shared everything that we're doing
they shared what they're doing he shared
his concerns we talked about solutions
and uh and i think lots of good will
come of it i think that
the miners will will now have a platform
to communicate just how sustainable they
are and their goals for sustainability
i think we can put together clear
clear metrics and models for the future
that communicates to the mainstream
investors and mainstream media and
anybody else that's interested what's
going on and
and i think that ultimately that's it's
constructive and a way for us to all go
forward together
in
in a in an environmentally friendly
appropriate fashion that everybody can
get behind i love it michaelman
seriously i can't thank you enough hey
for coming on the show but b for being
a um an ambassador for this moment
where if this really is that sort of
once in a thousand year opportunity for
people to get into something early that
could become
you know the dominant protocol in in a
shift where money becomes technology
and as somebody who is just so hungry
for the average person to have that kind
of opportunity
for you to take the time to boil the
stuff down to first principles to walk
people through this i know what you have
a company to run and yet you've taken
you know hours to be with me you've done
this countless times to put this
information out there i watched your
debate on gold i mean it's just that the
number of
things that you're doing to help people
understand what this is and then
obviously ultimately it's up to
everybody to determine their risk
tolerance and uh you know what they're
willing to do but
dude i just i'm blown away by
your willingness to engage this
community
and
you know give people a
way to think through the problem so
thank you for that and where where can
people follow you to get more of your
insights the best place to follow me is
on twitter at michael underscore sailor
and then if you're interested in bitcoin
bitcoin is hope so go to hope.com
h-o-p-e and i post everything
on hope.com
and so uh thank you tom for giving me a
platform i do think it's an opportunity
to improve the lives of billions of
people and but i think it's a
complicated new subject and it merits
you know information like you're
conveying
you know on your on your uh podcast here
dude thank you guys trust me when i say
that you're gonna want to spend as much
time with michael saylor as possible i
forced all of my family to set up
wallets so that i could send them money
myself so that they could buy crypt i
wouldn't even send them crypto i made
them go buy it themselves so they could
understand how the process works they
could decide what coins they wanted to
get but this really like
this uh i michael has already said
everything that he's gonna say you
should definitely trust him over me but
i will just say this really feels
different this really feels special this
feels like a moment it feels like a
movement that's the right way to say it
it feels like a movement and there is
nobody and i mean nobody that i've seen
in this space that is a better um voice
for that movement than michael i cannot
encourage you enough to go spend i'm not
kidding 10 hours watching his videos you
will be richly rewarded you will have
somebody walking through first
principles about why this stuff makes
sense and i get it if this was your
first introduction it's hard to wrap
your minds around it he's very
consistent you're going to hear those
things over and over and over and
eventually it's all going to make sense
and you'll be armed enough to make your
own decision but please research this
stuff i beseech you just because i like
to see other people succeed i beseech
you to research even if you walk away
saying it doesn't make sense for me i
just don't want people to miss this
opportunity out of ignorance so thank
you guys for rocking this one i consider
this a very special episode again
michael thank you amazing to have you
and guys speaking of things that are
amazing if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
[Music]
you